THE SENTINEL
Arthur C. Clarke
1951 Avon Periodicals Inc. 
The next time you see the full moon high in the south, look carefully at its right-hand edge and let 
your eye travel upward along the curve of the disk. Round about two o’clock you will notice a 
small, dark oval: anyone with normal eyesight can find it quite easily. It is the great walled plain, 
one of the finest on the Moon, known as the Mare Crisium-the Sea of Crises. Three hundred miles 
in diameter, and almost completely surrounded by a ring of magnificent mountains, it had never 
been explored until we entered it in the late summer of 1996.
Our expedition was a large one. We had two heavy freighters which had flown our supplies and 
equipment from the main lunar base in the Mare Serenitatis, five hundred miles away. There were
also three small rockets which were intended for short-range transport over regions which our 
surface vehicles couldn’t cross. Luckily, most of the Mare Crisiurn is very flat. There are none of
the great crevasses so common and so dangerous elsewhere, and very few craters or mountains of 
any size. As far as we could tell, our powerful caterpillar tractors would have no difficulty in taking
us wherever we wished to go.
I was geologist-or selenologist called Chad, if you want to be pedantic in charge of. the group exploring the 
southern region of the Mare. We had crossed a hundred miles of it in a week, skirting the foothills 
of the mountains along the shore of what was once the ancient sea, some thousand million years 
before. When life was beginning on Earth, it was already dying here. The waters were retreating 
down the flanks of those stupendous cliff s, retreating into the empty heart of the Moon. Over the 
land which we were crossing, the tideless ocean had once been half a mile deep, and now the only 
trace of moisture was the hoarfrost one could sometimes find in caves which the searing sunlight 
never penetrated.
We had begun our journey early in the slow lunar dawn, and still had almost a week of Earth-time 
before nightfall. Half a dozen times a day we would leave our vehicle and go outside in the 
spacesuits to hunt for interesting minerals, or to place markers for the guidance of future travelers. 
It was an uneventful routine. There is nothing hazardous or even particularly exciting about lunar 
exploration. We could live comfortably for a month in our pressurized tractors, and if we ran into 
trouble we could always radio for help and sit tight until one of the spaceships came to our rescue.
I said just now that there was nothing exciting about lunar exploration, but of course that isn’t true. 
One could never grow tired of those incredible mountains, so much more rugged than the gentle 
hills of Earth. We never knew, as we rounded the capes and promontories of that vanished sea, 
what new splendors would be revealed to us. The whole southern curve of the Mare Crisiurn is a 
vast delta where a score of rivers once found their way into the ocean, fed perhaps by the torrential 
rains that must have lashed the mountains in the brief volcanic age when the Moon was young. 
Each of these ancient valleys was an invitation, challenging us to climb into the unknown uplands 
beyond. But we had a hundred miles still to cover, and could only look longingly at the heights 
which others must scale.